                                                                Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
Abstract:-

    The Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) is a global organization of states that do not officially align themselves with any major power blocs. The movement emerged during the Cold War as a response to the domination of world affairs by the United States and the Soviet Union, and has since evolved to become a platform for promoting the interests of developing countries and maintaining global peace and security.

        Expressing solidarity with the interests of their world countries that had similar historical experiences with colonialism and economic and social backwardness led to the merging of political identifies into the identities of non elegant countries. It that sense, the united nation played a decisive role because its enable the rapprochement of states that going independence and freedom form the yoke of former colonial powers in the precedence of decolonization.

        Where those the politics of sub com tinel stand in present day scenario is something a million dollar question. My research paper tries to answer all the queries of the present situation where western politics and thinking is challenging the economic and political idealogy of the orient. This paper explores the origin, evolution and significance of the Non-Aligned Movement, as will as its current relevance in the 21st. This article attempts to discuss the following research questions which are- 
            1. The reason for the formation of non-aligned movement?
            2. India's role in Non-Aligned Movement?
            3. How successful was the Non-Aligned Movement?
            4. Current relevance of the Non-Aligned Movement?
        
    Keywords:-
                Non-Aligned Movement, cold-war, international politics, Global South, Asia, Africa, India. 

Introduction:-

    The Non-Aligned Movement is a political concept that emerged during the Cold War as a response to the bipolar division of the world into two major power blocs, led by the United States and the Soviet Union. The movement was founded in 1961, during the first Non-Aligned Summit in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, where representatives of 25 developing countries gathered to discuss the challenges facing their nations and to explore ways of promoting their common interests. Since then, the movement has grown to encompass over 120 countries, making it one of the largest and most diverse international organizations in the world.

        Azerbaijan has sought to mitigate regional security risks and to formulate co-operation with different regional actors. The relevance of non-alignment as a cornerstone of Azerbaijan's foreign and security policy increased after the Russia-Georgia war of 2008. In general, Azerbaijan's non-aligned stance is strongly rooted in a pragmatic understanding of the strategic opportunities embedded in and around the region. This stance was motivated by the fragility of the regional security environment and dictated by Azerbaijan's historical, cultural, and linguistic ties, religious affiliation, and geographical location.

        The topic incorporates up-to-date theory and information. Due importance has also been given to the interests of Jatis and the role of Non-Aligned Movement as part of it. And the origin of the Non-Aligned Movement, principles of the Non-Aligned Movement, India's role, success and failure of the Non-Aligned Movement, contribution of the Non-Aligned Movement, evaluation etc. have been discussed in detail. Some authoritative books on the subject have been taken with this help.