1. Reasons for the formation of the neutral movement:- In the two decades of the twentieth century, two world wars took place, the United Nations was formed with many hopes. But the United Nations could not maintain world peace. To make people's dreams of peace a reality, peace loving people of the world started thinking of various plans. Prominent leaders of developed countries thought of building a non-aligned movement during the war transition with the goals of disarmament, ending colonialism, peaceful settlement of international disputes, opposing apartheid, supporting economic reconstruction, building a non-aligned world, etc. Jawaharlal Nehru, one of the founders of the Non-Aligned Movement, believed that a bipolar world would harm the newly independent countries of the Third World. Great powers can use weaker, smaller countries in alliances and use them like chess pieces. The social and economic progress of all these countries may be blocked. The world was divided into two camps, communist and capitalist. India's Prime Minister Nehru took the initiative to form the Non-Aligned Movement to prevent the two superpowers, America and Russia, from influencing small and medium-sized countries. He was supported by President Nasser of Egypt, Tito of Sofia Yugoslavia, Janar Ntruma and Sukon of Indonesia. In 1947, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru thought of building an active anti-colonial movement in developed countries. In Delhi, he called a conference of several countries in Asia and Africa. In 1949, a conference was convened in Delhi to discuss Indonesia's quest for independence. The conference was of particular significance in the history of the evolution of non-alignment policy. An agreement was signed between India and China on Tibet in April 1954. The brotherly states agreed that the future of the two countries would be governed by the five principles included in the agreement. The principles are known as 'Panchasheel'.

        The 'Five' principles are, enumerated- 1. Mutual respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of each state.
                   2. Immunity.
                   3. Non-interference in the internal affairs of the State.
                   4. Equality and mutual aid.
                   5. Peaceful Coexistence.
            Bandung Conference:- Another significant step in the development of the Non-Aligned Movement was a historic conference of Afro-Asian countries held in Bandung, Indonesia in 1955. Not all of the 29 countries that attended the conference were non-aligned. Military allies like Pakistan, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Philippines, and Thailand also attended the conference. Although the conference succeeded in resolving mutual disputes between the countries present, the conference also strengthened the principle of non-alignment. The former President of India KR Narayanan commented in his article Non-alignment in contemporary international relations, the triumph of non-alignment began in the intense conflict between the aligned and non-aligned countries at the Bandung Conference.

        Various Summits of Non-Aligned Movement:-
            a. Belgrade Summit,(1961):- The 25 countries present at the first summit held in Belgrade included majority of South Asian and North African countries. European issues dominated the conference discussions. Delegates attending the conference protested strongly against the presence and pressure of the Cold War and military alliances, and expressed concern for colonialism and colonialism. Military and political issues dominated the conference discussions.
            b. Cairo Disciple Conference, (1964):- Second Non-Aligned Summit was held in Cairo in 1964. In that conference resolutions were adopted against imperialism, apartheid system.
            c. Lusaka Summit, (1970):- The Third Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement was held from 8 to 10 September 1970 in Lusaka, the capital of Zambia.
            d. Algiers Summit, 1973:- Algiers in 1973 gave momentum and progressive vision to the Non-Aligned Movement. The conference adopted a program of economic cooperation and emphasized the expansion of economic cooperation between the non-aligned countries and the developed countries of the West and the socialist countries.
            e. Colombo Summit, (1976):- The Colombo Summit was held in 1976. Economic issues dominated the discussion of the conference.
            f.Havana Conference, 1979:- The economic problems of South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, West Asia and the members dominated the negotiations on integration.
            g. New Delhi Conference (1983):- To establish a consensus on disarmament near the Western countries and the importance of world economic affairs can be observed.
            h. Eighth Non-Aligned Summit Harare Conference, (1986):- The Eighth Non-Aligned Summit was held in September 1986 in Harara, the capital of Zimbabwe. 101 countries participated in the conference, including Palestine.
            i. Ninth Non-Aligned Conference, Belgrade Conference, 1991:- The Ninth Non-Aligned Conference was held in Belgrade in September 1991. 102 June Member States participate as guest states.
            j. Jakarta Summit,(1992):- The Tenth Summit of NAM held in Jakarta in 1992 gave birth to that aspiration. Among the programs adopted in this phase were strengthening the alliance of the developing world against the collective alliance of advanced capitalist countries and strengthening South-South cooperation.
            k. Twelfth Summit, Durban, 1998:- The Twelfth Non-Aligned Summit was held in Durban, South Africa in September 1998. About 114 non-aligned countries participated in the conference.
            l. Eleventh Summit, Kuala Lumpur, (2003) :- The Non-Aligned Summit was convened in February 2003. 116 members attended the summit in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
            m. Fourteenth Conference Havana, (2006):- 118 countries participated in the conference. And in 2009 and 2012 respectively in Havana, Sham El Sheikh and Tehran conference more decisions were taken on establishment of mutual status, coordination, prevention of environmental pollution, counter terrorism etc.

        Thus various non-aligned movements have helped to express the interests of member nations. According to Professor Jayantanuj Banerjee, non-alignment depends on the promotion of the movement. The rapid expansion of the neutral movement did not divide the world into two rival camps. This movement played an important role in the eviction of colonialism. Imperialism, neo-colonialism evolved into influential international movements against apartheid and the hegemony practiced by large states over small states. As a result of this movement, the international system became global. The advanced shills of the Non-Aligned Movement evolved into a collective economic movement in the Third World.

2. India's Role in Non-Aligned Movement:- Jawaharlal Nehru was the first Prime Minister of India who established one of the main principles of Non-Aligned Movement. He first spoke about the non-alignment of the Indian leader on 7th December 1947. His statement was that no group in India will participate in politics, rather all groups will stay away from politics in India. He felt that after World War II the entire world was divided into two sati camps and should not be joined by any newly independent country including India. He followed independent independent foreign policy i.e. non-alignment policy. Non-alignment, according to Nehru, did not mean remaining indifferent to world politics but forcing the developed world to take concrete steps and give him dignity. According to him, it cannot be done by a single effort of any country. That is why it is necessary to unite. Under his leadership, the policy of non-alignment gradually evolved into a separate single-state coalition.


    India has followed a policy of non-alignment in its relations with foreign states. Non-alignment does not mean that India cannot establish close relations with any country and protest any injustice in the international arena. In this context, Nehru said, "Where liberty is threatened and justice is attacked, one can never remain neutral." Although adopting a policy of de facto non-alignment, India has not completely isolated itself from international disputes or problems. India has been active in Korea War, Vietnam War, Congo Crisis, Arab-Israeli etc. On the one hand, national movements in the Middle East, Africa and Latin America have expressed unhesitating support for them, while on the other hand they have strongly criticized the aggressive policies and roles of imperialist powers. As one of the major leaders of the Third World, India has tried to protect the interests of the underdeveloped countries in any international forum or conference or summit with the ease of the United Nations. There was a real time when there was no international issue and problem in the world where India did not react strongly.

        India's non-alignment is a strategy to gain military advantage, not a system. It is completely compatible with Indian politics and tradition. Critics of the policy of non-alignment Says the Cold War environment may have necessitated it. There is no need for peacetime in a unipolar world. Nijhut movement leaders replied that world politics will continue to adjust this policy according to the situation.
        India is not only one of the main promoters of the Non-Aligned Movement, but has played an important role in solving international problems by actively participating in the Non-Aligned Movement. namely-