Current Relevance of Non-Aligned Movement:-
         There is a debate on whether the non-aligned movement is relevant or important in today's world. This debate began in 1991 after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Those who say that the Non-Aligned Movement has no relevance at present are making the following arguments.

                               1. Non-Alignment Meaningless in Unipolar World:- According to many, as long as there was the cold war, as long as there was bipolarity in the world, and as long as the US alliance was facing the Soviet-led alliance, the word non-alignment had meaning. The antagonism of the two alliances was so intense that whatever policy the neutrals adopted in any important matter, they could be sure of the support of one or the other. At the beginning of the nineties of the twentieth century, after the collapse of Soviet Russia and socialist countries, the bipolar world has become unipolar. So where there is no alliance, the word neutrality is meaningless.

                               2. Disunity among the members:- Not only now, but for several years, it has been seen that due to structural differences and conflicts of interest among the non-aligned countries, they can't a consensus on any issue. Addressing the conference, Libya's President Gaddafi bluntly said, "The Nijort movement is a ridiculous international joke and now reach will aim to eradicate this movement".

					3. Other Weaknesses:- According to some, non-alignment was relevant as long as the non-aligned states were in a position to negotiate with the superpower states on economic, military, and other matters. With the end of the Cold War and the bipolar international system, non-aligned countries lost their bargaining power. Countries like India-Indonesia, one of the founding countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, were involved. Moreover, intense disagreements among the member states based on religious affiliation, regionalism, ethnic conflicts, etc. have also weakened the Non-Aligned Movement in the conflict. Due to these reasons, it is said that the days of non-aligned movement are over in the present situation.

NON-ALIGNMENT IS RELEVANT TODAY:- Today the Non-Aligned Movement is facing an important problem. In the context of recent international politics, a debate has started in international circles about the relevance of the Non-Aligned Movement. At present, the main objectives of the Non-Aligned Movement, namely national independence, territorialism, and opposition to colonialism, are not possible to implement. As a result, the relevance of this movement is still there today. The areas where the relevance of the Non-Aligned Movement is observed are the following –
            		      a.First of all:- The poor countries of the world are not exploited and oppressed by the existing superpowers. On the other hand, despite the multipolarity, the first hegemony of the United States is established today. The Non-Aligned Movement against US decolonization and neocolonialism reached its peak today.
					b. Secondly:- The Non-Aligned Movement continues to speak strongly before the United Nations for the self-determination of Puerto Rico and Western Sahara. From 1961 to the present, the non-aligned movement for the self-determination of Puerto Rico has been active. At the Fifth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement held in Sham EI Sheik in 2009, the Non-Aligned Movement for the Self-Determination of the People of Western Sahara presented a statement.
                              c. Third:- Economic underdevelopment, poverty, and lack of social justice are considered by the neutral movement as obstacles to peace and security. Due to globalization, the Non-Aligned Movement has taken a role in addressing the socio-economic problems faced by the Non-Aligned countries due to disunity and the influence of neo-liberal policies.
                              d. Fourth:- The Non-Aligned Movement has been proactive in South-South cooperation. The Non-Aligned Movement has extended its hand of cooperation with various organizations of developing countries such as the 'Group of 77'. By this, the movement has attempted to re-establish its political importance in the world.

		So it can be said from the above discussion, Dr.wan and xiao, two Chinese visiting and international relations experts present at the Non-Aligned Movement Summit held in Jakarta (1992) opined that the Non-Aligned Movement has become more relevant than before after the Cold War. They also say that the only non-aligned movement that can currently counter the collective threat of Western hegemony. On strategy, he said that what is needed now for non-alignment is to clash with developed countries and use them for their interests. Again, the Secretary General of the United Nations, Dr. Bus Gal, who was present at the 11th Summit held in Katajana, expressed his opinion that the end of the Cold War and Bipolarity did not make the Non-Aligned Movement unimportant, rather it raised a new goal and ideal in front of this movement.





