                        Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)

Abstract:-

    The Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) is a global organization of states that do not officially align themselves with any major power blocs. The movement emerged during the Cold War as a response to the domination of world affairs by the United States and the Soviet Union, and has since evolved to become a platform for promoting the interests of developing countries and maintaining global peace and security.

        Expressing solidarity with the interests of their world countries that had similar historical experiences with colonialism and economic and social backwardness led to the merging of political identifies into the identities of non elegant countries. It that sense, the united nation played a decisive role because its enable the rapprochement of states that going independence and freedom form the yoke of former colonial powers in the precedence of decolonization.

        Where those the politics of sub com tinel stand in present day scenario is something a million dollar question. My research paper tries to answer all the queries of the present situation where western politics and thinking is challenging the economic and political idealogy of the orient. This paper explores the origin, evolution and significance of the Non-Aligned Movement, as will as its current relevance in the 21st. This article attempts to discuss the following research questions which are- 
            1. The reason for the formation of non-aligned movement?
            2. India's role in Non-Aligned Movement?
            3. How successful was the Non-Aligned Movement?
            4. Current relevance of the Non-Aligned Movement?
        
    Keywords:- Non-Aligned Movement, cold-war, international politics, Global South, Asia, Africa, India. 

Introduction:-

    The Non-Aligned Movement is a political concept that emerged during the Cold War as a response to the bipolar division of the world into two major power blocs, led by the United States and the Soviet Union. The movement was founded in 1961, during the first Non-Aligned Summit in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, where representatives of 25 developing countries gathered to discuss the challenges facing their nations and to explore ways of promoting their common interests. Since then, the movement has grown to encompass over 120 countries, making it one of the largest and most diverse international organizations in the world.

        Azerbaijan has sought to mitigate regional security risks and to formulate co-operation with different regional actors. The relevance of non-alignment as a cornerstone of Azerbaijan's foreign and security policy increased after the Russia-Georgia war of 2008. In general, Azerbaijan's non-aligned stance is strongly rooted in a pragmatic understanding of the strategic opportunities embedded in and around the region. This stance was motivated by the fragility of the regional security environment and dictated by Azerbaijan's historical, cultural, and linguistic ties, religious affiliation, and geographical location.

        The topic incorporates up-to-date theory and information. Due importance has also been given to the interests of Jatis and the role of Non-Aligned Movement as part of it. And the origin of the Non-Aligned Movement, principles of the Non-Aligned Movement, India's role, success and failure of the Non-Aligned Movement, contribution of the Non-Aligned Movement, evaluation etc. have been discussed in detail. Some authoritative books on the subject have been taken with this help.

1. Reasons for the formation of the neutral movement:- In the two decades of the twentieth century, two world wars took place, the United Nations was formed with many hopes. But the United Nations could not maintain world peace. To make people's dreams of peace a reality, peace loving people of the world started thinking of various plans. Prominent leaders of developed countries thought of building a non-aligned movement during the war transition with the goals of disarmament, ending colonialism, peaceful settlement of international disputes, opposing apartheid, supporting economic reconstruction, building a non-aligned world, etc. Jawaharlal Nehru, one of the founders of the Non-Aligned Movement, believed that a bipolar world would harm the newly independent countries of the Third World. Great powers can use weaker, smaller countries in alliances and use them like chess pieces. The social and economic progress of all these countries may be blocked. The world was divided into two camps, communist and capitalist. India's Prime Minister Nehru took the initiative to form the Non-Aligned Movement to prevent the two superpowers, America and Russia, from influencing small and medium-sized countries. He was supported by President Nasser of Egypt, Tito of Sofia Yugoslavia, Janar Ntruma and Sukon of Indonesia. In 1947, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru thought of building an active anti-colonial movement in developed countries. In Delhi, he called a conference of several countries in Asia and Africa. In 1949, a conference was convened in Delhi to discuss Indonesia's quest for independence. The conference was of particular significance in the history of the evolution of non-alignment policy. An agreement was signed between India and China on Tibet in April 1954. The brotherly states agreed that the future of the two countries would be governed by the five principles included in the agreement. The principles are known as 'Panchasheel'.

        The 'Five' principles are, enumerated- 1. Mutual respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of each state.
                   2. Immunity.
                   3. Non-interference in the internal affairs of the State.
                   4. Equality and mutual aid.
                   5. Peaceful Coexistence.
            Bandung Conference:- Another significant step in the development of the Non-Aligned Movement was a historic conference of Afro-Asian countries held in Bandung, Indonesia in 1955. Not all of the 29 countries that attended the conference were non-aligned. Military allies like Pakistan, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Philippines, and Thailand also attended the conference. Although the conference succeeded in resolving mutual disputes between the countries present, the conference also strengthened the principle of non-alignment. The former President of India KR Narayanan commented in his article Non-alignment in contemporary international relations, the triumph of non-alignment began in the intense conflict between the aligned and non-aligned countries at the Bandung Conference.

        Various Summits of Non-Aligned Movement:-
            a. Belgrade Summit,(1961):- The 25 countries present at the first summit held in Belgrade included majority of South Asian and North African countries. European issues dominated the conference discussions. Delegates attending the conference protested strongly against the presence and pressure of the Cold War and military alliances, and expressed concern for colonialism and colonialism. Military and political issues dominated the conference discussions.
            b. Cairo Disciple Conference, (1964):- Second Non-Aligned Summit was held in Cairo in 1964. In that conference resolutions were adopted against imperialism, apartheid system.
            c. Lusaka Summit, (1970):- The Third Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement was held from 8 to 10 September 1970 in Lusaka, the capital of Zambia.
            d. Algiers Summit, 1973:- Algiers in 1973 gave momentum and progressive vision to the Non-Aligned Movement. The conference adopted a program of economic cooperation and emphasized the expansion of economic cooperation between the non-aligned countries and the developed countries of the West and the socialist countries.
            e. Colombo Summit, (1976):- The Colombo Summit was held in 1976. Economic issues dominated the discussion of the conference.
            f.Havana Conference, 1979:- The economic problems of South Africa, Namibia, Zimbabwe, West Asia and the members dominated the negotiations on integration.
            g. New Delhi Conference (1983):- To establish a consensus on disarmament near the Western countries and the importance of world economic affairs can be observed.
            h. Eighth Non-Aligned Summit Harare Conference, (1986):- The Eighth Non-Aligned Summit was held in September 1986 in Harara, the capital of Zimbabwe. 101 countries participated in the conference, including Palestine.
            i. Ninth Non-Aligned Conference, Belgrade Conference, 1991:- The Ninth Non-Aligned Conference was held in Belgrade in September 1991. 102 June Member States participate as guest states.
            j. Jakarta Summit,(1992):- The Tenth Summit of NAM held in Jakarta in 1992 gave birth to that aspiration. Among the programs adopted in this phase were strengthening the alliance of the developing world against the collective alliance of advanced capitalist countries and strengthening South-South cooperation.
            k. Twelfth Summit, Durban, 1998:- The Twelfth Non-Aligned Summit was held in Durban, South Africa in September 1998. About 114 non-aligned countries participated in the conference.
            l. Eleventh Summit, Kuala Lumpur, (2003) :- The Non-Aligned Summit was convened in February 2003. 116 members attended the summit in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
            m. Fourteenth Conference Havana, (2006):- 118 countries participated in the conference. And in 2009 and 2012 respectively in Havana, Sham El Sheikh and Tehran conference more decisions were taken on establishment of mutual status, coordination, prevention of environmental pollution, counter terrorism etc.

        Thus various non-aligned movements have helped to express the interests of member nations. According to Professor Jayantanuj Banerjee, non-alignment depends on the promotion of the movement. The rapid expansion of the neutral movement did not divide the world into two rival camps. This movement played an important role in the eviction of colonialism. Imperialism, neo-colonialism evolved into influential international movements against apartheid and the hegemony practiced by large states over small states. As a result of this movement, the international system became global. The advanced shills of the Non-Aligned Movement evolved into a collective economic movement in the Third World.

2. India's Role in Non-Aligned Movement:- Jawaharlal Nehru was the first Prime Minister of India who established one of the main principles of Non-Aligned Movement. He first spoke about the non-alignment of the Indian leader on 7th December 1947. His statement was that no group in India will participate in politics, rather all groups will stay away from politics in India. He felt that after World War II the entire world was divided into two sati camps and should not be joined by any newly independent country including India. He followed independent independent foreign policy i.e. non-alignment policy. Non-alignment, according to Nehru, did not mean remaining indifferent to world politics but forcing the developed world to take concrete steps and give him dignity. According to him, it cannot be done by a single effort of any country. That is why it is necessary to unite. Under his leadership, the policy of non-alignment gradually evolved into a separate single-state coalition.

    India has followed a policy of non-alignment in its relations with foreign states. Non-alignment does not mean that India cannot establish close relations with any country and protest any injustice in the international arena. In this context, Nehru said, "Where liberty is threatened and justice is attacked, one can never remain neutral." Although adopting a policy of de facto non-alignment, India has not completely isolated itself from international disputes or problems. India has been active in Korea War, Vietnam War, Congo Crisis, Arab-Israeli etc. On the one hand, national movements in the Middle East, Africa and Latin America have expressed unhesitating support for them, while on the other hand they have strongly criticized the aggressive policies and roles of imperialist powers. As one of the major leaders of the Third World, India has tried to protect the interests of the underdeveloped countries in any international forum or conference or summit with the ease of the United Nations. There was a real time when there was no international issue and problem in the world where India did not react strongly.

        India's non-alignment is a strategy to gain military advantage, not a system. It is completely compatible with Indian politics and tradition. Critics of the policy of non-alignment Says the Cold War environment may have necessitated it. There is no need for peacetime in a unipolar world. Nijhut movement leaders replied that world politics will continue to adjust this policy according to the situation.
        India is not only one of the main promoters of the Non-Aligned Movement, but has played an important role in solving international problems by actively participating in the Non-Aligned Movement. namely- 
                    a. Keeping distance from military alliances:- India has always tried to keep the sea away from two powerful military alliances i.e. western capitalist alliance and Russian socialist alliance.
                    b. Role of Korean War: India has played a significant role in resolving the complex issue of POWs that arose after the Dear War in 1950 AD.
                    C. Role in Vietnam and War: During the Indochina or Vietnam War, India expressed its independent views against imperialism and colonialism.
                    d. India also criticized Soviet Russia during the invasion of Egypt and the incident in Hungary.
                    e.Treatment of relations with Pakistan:- India is always keen to maintain good relations with its neighbor Pakistan and India is keen to take the advice of the United Nations in this regard. Also - opposition to imperialism and discriminatory policies, etc. factors.
        Reasons for India adopting this policy:-
                a. The need of the time.
                b. For the past development of the country.
                c. Military alliances may prove detrimental to developing countries.
                d. Geographical location of India.
                e. To formulate independent foreign policy.
                f. Freedom of movement.
                g. Historical reasons.
                H. Beliefs of Jawaharlal Nehru.
        Advantages of India's non-alignment:- 
                a. India has been able to enjoy and maintain freedom in policy formulation.
                b. The policy of non-alignment is tailored to the interests of the nation of India.
                c. India has been able to maintain neutrality.
                d. India's role in international solutions has been recognized.
                e. India has been able to get support from both blocs.
    From the above discussion, it can be said that the contribution of the Non-Aligned Movement plays an important role in the international arena. After the end of World War II in 1945, the role of the Non-Aligned Movement behind the current World War III was undeniable.

3. Successes and failures of non-alignment:- India had no foreign policy or foreign policy of its own before independence. India's first independent foreign policy was adopted during the tenure of Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister after independence. India proceeded to define its foreign policy based on non-violence and peace. He never ignored traditional traditions. So Palmer and Pakins say - India's foreign policy is rooted in the civilizations that have developed over the centuries, especially Hindu, Buddhist, and Muslim life-views and thought-techniques.
      
        In Southeast Asia:-
                a. On Kobia issue:- India played a very important role in 1950s AD in the face of the challenge of superpowers in solving the complex issue of war between North and South Korea. The Soviet Union and the United States were directly involved in this war. India was initially rejected by neither side, but later its ceasefire initiative was welcomed even by Bhai Shakti. After the cessation of hostilities, the issue of prisoner settlement was amicably resolved under the leadership of General Thimayya through the mediation of India.
                b. In Vietnam problem:- India's role in solving the Vietnam problem was also very significant on the nationalist struggle against Indochina sir last imperialism. India openly supports the free struggle of these regional masses against French imperialism. India's role in the Geneva Conference in 1954 was also honorable in this regard. Three commissions were appointed to give effect to the cease-fire decisions of the conference. J. was appointed as the president of them. M. Desai, J. N. Khosla and J. Parthasarathi.
                c. Nomination of China as a member of the United Nations:- When the Communist Republic of China was established in 1949 AD, the US alliance established the Democratic China was accepted as a member of the League of Nations or the Union of States.
        In West Asia and Africa:-
                a. Establishing a Middle East Military Alliance:- In 1950, India accepted the US's Seato and Baghdad Pacts aimed at establishing a military alliance in the Middle East.
                b. In the freedom movement of West Asia:- India supports the anti-imperialist struggle and national freedom movement in West Asia.
                c. Hungary Issue:- Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956 AD India protested against the execution of some Hungarian leaders by the Soviet Union in 1958 AD. India showed special prowess in the United Nations to resolve the Hungarian crisis.
                d. Peacekeeping in Congo:- India sends troops to help UN forces to keep Congo united and bring peace there.

    Reasons for the failure of the Non-Aligned Movement:- In March 1947, Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru commented that various countries in Asia had become the western countries in their turn.
        a. India-China Conflict:- India's Nizot policy also became the cause of conflict between China and India. In 1959, the India-China dispute arose over the granting of asylum to the Dalai Lama by India and China's attempts to expand its influence in Southeast Asia. India invaded on 20 October 1962, and unilaterally declared a ceasefire again on 21 November. But ever since, China continues to try to prepare the ground for war in various ways.
        b. Pak-India conflict:- Kashmir issue, Pak-India. International border disputes etc. strained relations between Pakistan and India. The Nehru-Nun Agreement of 1958 AD ceded a part of the Berubari region to Pakistan, but the border dispute did not stop. 1965 AD Pak India war started when Pakistan occupied some areas of Kutch border. Later the war was opposed by the intervention of the Security Council. To this end in 1966 the Tashkent Agreement was signed between Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri and President Ayub Khan, brokered by Soviet Prime Minister Kerosigin. The parties accept the pre-war ceasefire line. However, Pakistan is still active in anti-India activities by giving covert support to militant groups.
        
    Reasons for Decline of Non-Aligned Movement:- The Non-Aligned Movement lost its importance and faced decline due to various reasons- 1. The movement lost its momentum with the end of Cold War after the fall of Soviet Union.
        2. The Cold War hastened the decline in times of lack of competent leaders.
        3. Disputes and wars between member countries have eroded the edge of this movement.
        4. Members also lose interest as they fail to secure any program of expansion of economic cooperation among members.

    From the above discussion it can be said that third world India maintained the institution of peace by balancing the bipolar politics of the world. Jawaharlal Nehru's caution in India's adoption of a policy of non-alignment was very positive: neutrality is meaningless where independence is compromised or just principles are attacked or where aggression is organized.

4. Current Relevance of Non-Aligned Movement:-
    There is a debate on whether the non-aligned movement is relevant or important in today's world. This debate began in 1991 after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Those who say that the Non-Aligned Movement has no relevance at present are making the following arguments.

        A. Non-Alignment Meaningless in Unipolar World:- According to many, as long as there was the cold war, as long as there was bipolarity in the world, and as long as the US alliance was facing the Soviet-led alliance, the word non-alignment had meaning. The antagonism of the two alliances was so intense that whatever policy the neutrals adopted in any important matter, they could be sure of the support of one or the other. At the beginning of the nineties of the twentieth century, after the collapse of Soviet Russia and socialist countries, the bipolar world has become unipolar. So where there is no alliance, the word neutrality is meaningless.

        B. Disunity among the members:- Not only now, but for several years, it has been seen that due to structural differences and conflicts of interest among the non-aligned countries, they can't a consensus on any issue. Addressing the conference, Libya's President Gaddafi bluntly said, "The Nijort movement is a ridiculous international joke and now reach will aim to eradicate this movement".

		C.Other Weaknesses:- According to some, non-alignment was relevant as long as the non-aligned states were in a position to negotiate with the superpower states on economic, military and other matters. With the end of the Cold War and the bipolar international system, non-aligned countries lost their bargaining power. Countries like India-Indonesia, one of the founding countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, were involved. Moreover, intense disagreements among the member states based on religious affiliation, regionalism, ethnic conflicts etc. have also weakened the Non-Aligned Movement in the conflict. Due to these reasons, it is said that the days of non-aligned movement are over in the present situation.

NON-ALIGNMENT IS RELEVANT TODAY:- Today the Non-Aligned Movement is facing an important problem. In the context of recent international politics, a debate has started in international circles about the relevance of the Non-Aligned Movement. At present, the main objectives of the Non-Aligned Movement, namely national independence, territorialism and opposition to colonialism, are not possible to implement. As a result, the relevance of this movement is still there today. The areas where the relevance of the Non-Aligned Movement is observed are the following –
        a. First of all:- The poor countries of the world are not exploited and oppressed by the existing superpowers. On the other hand, in spite of the multipolarity, the first hegemony of the United States is established today. The Non-Aligned Movement against US decolonization and neocolonialism reached its peak today.
		b. Secondly:- The Non-Aligned Movement continues to speak strongly before the United Nations for the self-determination of Puerto Rico and Western Sahara. From 1961 to the present, the non-aligned movement for self-determination of Puerto Rico has been active. At the Fifth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement held in Sham EI Sheik in 2009, the Non-Aligned Movement for the Self-Determination of the People of Western Sahara presented a statement.
        c. Third:- Economic underdevelopment, poverty and lack of social justice are considered by the neutral movement as obstacles to peace and security. Due to globalization, the Non-Aligned Movement has taken a role in addressing the socio-economic problems faced by the Non-Aligned countries due to disunity and the influence of neo-liberal policies.
        d. Fourth:- The Non-Aligned Movement has been proactive in South-South cooperation. The Non-Aligned Movement has extended its hand of cooperation with various organizations of developing countries such as the 'Group of 77'. By this the movement has attempted to re-establish its political importance in the world.
    
    Arguments for the Non-Aligned Movement:-
        a. Protection of human rights: Human rights of the so-called poor countries are being violated in the present world. Since its inception, the Non-Aligned Movement has been an active force in the defense of human rights within and outside the United Nations. Today, therefore, there is a need for non-violent movements to protect the human rights of the poor and weak states of the world.

        b.Peace-building: The present world is always afraid and afraid of nuclear weapons. A few countries, including the United States, have threatened the so-called weak nations with nuclear weapons. Not only that, the developing countries have been pressured financially and militarily by the United States to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. In spite of this US pressure, the need for non-violent movement has not ended even today to create an atmosphere of real peace in the entire world.

    Arguments against non-alignment
        a. Monopoly: In the bipolar international politics during the Cold War, non-aligned member states received financial and military bargaining opportunities from both the Soviet and US camps. But after the fall of the Soviet Union, this bargaining opportunity was lost. US aid became the only source of hope in terms of financial and military opportunities. So, in this context, non-joint movement is irrelevant.

        b.Leadership Failures and Conflicts: Leaders such as Jawaharlal Nehru, Abdul Gamal Nasser, Joseph Broz Tito, Sukarno, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Sirimavae Bandaranaike, Kenneth Kaunda etc. took the Non-Aligned Movement to the level it did. The next leaders failed. Naturally, the failure of leadership and the conflict and disunity of the member states have made the non-aligned movement irrelevant in the current situation.

	So it can be said from the above discussion, Dr.wan and xiao, two Chinese visiting and international relations experts present at the Non-Aligned Movement Summit held in Jakarta (1992) opined that the Non-Aligned Movement has become more relevant than before after the Cold War. They also say that the only non-aligned movement that can currently counter the collective threat of Western hegemony. On strategy, he said that what is needed now for non-alignment is to clash with developed countries and use them for their own interests. Again, the Secretary General of the United Nations, Dr. Bus Gal, who was present at the 11th Summit held in Katajana, expressed his opinion that the end of the Cold War and Bipolarity did not make the Non-Aligned Movement unimportant, rather it raised a new goal and ideal in front of this movement.

Conclusion:- Finally it can be said that despite the bipolarism of the last decade of the 20th century, the importance of non-aligned movements has declined due to the end of the Cold War and the impact of globalization. The impact of globalization has made third world developing countries dependent on powerful capitalist countries. And by bringing the Third World countries together on the same evening, India was able to balance the world's bipolar politics and establish peace. Jawaharlal Nehru's caution in adopting India's policy of non-alignment was very positive where independence was threatened or where neutrality was inimical or where neutrality was meaningless. The Non-Aligned Movement is significant for a number of reasons. First, it represents a powerful voice for the interests of developing countries, and provides a platform for these nations to articulate their concerns and to promote their agendas. Second, the movement has played an important role in promoting the decolonization of Africa and Asia, and in challenging the domination of the major power blocs. Third, the movement has been instrumental in promoting global peace and security, and in promoting the idea of a more just and equitable world.
    